PETALING JAYA: Computer game soundtracks are as recognisable as movie scores these days and have garnered a huge following of fans.

Where once a videogame score was just a potpourri of cheesy tunes and sound effects, these now comprise orchestral strains and can qualify as audio masterpieces in their own right.

“The soundtrack is an integral part of the action in a videogame,” said music composer Tommy Tallarico.

He is also the creator, executive producer and host of Video Games Live (VGL) – a concert tour featuring videogame music compositions – at Istana Budaya yesterday and today.

Tallarico – who is a cousin of Aerosmith frontman and American Idol judge Steven Tyler – was speaking at an interview on The Red Zone, a radio show by RedFM on Thursday.

He believes that more videogame players can hum the soundtrack of their favourite game than there are those who can hum the soundtrack of their favourite movie.

“This is because people usually spend about two hours to watch a movie but videogamers invest about 30 to 40 hours of playing time with a computer game,” he said.

Tallarico is in the 2008 Guinness Book of Records for being the most prolific videogame music composer. He has 275 game soundtracks – and counting – to his credit, including classics such as Earthworm Jim and the original Prince of Persia.

Also in the studio was Norihiko Hibino, a composer and saxophonist, who composed most of the Metal Gear Solid game soundtracks and, recently, the soundtrack for Bayonetta.

Tallarico got involved in the industry when on his first day of selling electronic keyboards at a music store in the 1990s, his first customer, who happened to be a game producer, had noticed his videogame-themed T-shirt and immediately offered him a job as a composer.

On the other hand, Hibino got into the videogame music industry as a saxophonist because that was the only job he could find at the time.

He has not looked back since.

Both now see VGL as a way to promote videogame soundtracks as a legitimate art form, equivalent to classical or mainstream music.

Tallarico’s favourite piece is the Street Fighter II medley and the theme from Castlevania, while Hibino’s is the theme from Metal Gear Solid: Snake Eater.